All right.
So now that our app is actually pretty much fully functional, other than the fact that we still don't
have the location data and we can't get the weather for the current location.
So that's what we're going to tackle in this lesson.
Now, the first thing we need to do to be able to get hold of the location data is to import a package
that Apple has created called CoreLocation.
And this comes with something called a location manager.
So we can create a locationManager here and it's going to be created from
the CLLocationManager class.
And this object that we've created, our locationManager is going to be responsible for getting hold
of the current GPS location of the phone.
But before we can use it though, the first thing we have to do is we have to trigger a permission request.
So we're going to say requestWhenInUseAuthorization. Because the user's location is a really private
piece of data,
you don't want apps to just know exactly where you are without having to ask for explicit permission.
So when we call this locationManager.requestWhenInuseAuthorization method,
wow, what a mouthful,
then it will show a pop up on screen that asks the user for permission.
But in addition to calling this method, we also have to go into the info.plist, which is the property
list where we've got a bunch of key-value pairs that determine some of the basic settings of our app.
And here, we're going to add a new property.
And if you scroll down in this list, you should be able to find one that says, "Privacy - Location When in
Use Usage Description.
And for this key, we're going to give a value that's going to be the message that we're going to tell
the user why we need their location.
So, we'll say, "We need your location to get the current weather for where you are."
So, now that we've got a Privacy - Location When in Use Usage Description, we can now head back and run our
app.
And as soon as the WeatherViewController loads up, you should see a pop up which is in black
if you're in dark mode, like I am, or in white if you are not in dark mode. And it'll ask you, "Do you want
to allow 'Clima' to access your location?"
And then here is that little string that we added earlier on in our plist,
"We need your location to get the current weather for where you are."
So make sure that while you're testing, you always click on Allow because, otherwise, you're going to have
to dig into the settings, the privacy and location settings, to allow the Clima app to access the location.
So now that we've gotten permission from the user to get their location, well, then the next step is to
use the locationManager to request location, and this method "Request for a one-time delivery of the
user's current location."
And because we're building a weather app here where we don't need to track where the user is or where
their car is,
so if you were building a navigation app or a fitness app where you needed the turn by turn location
data the entire time that they're using the app, then you might want to use something called
startUpdatingLocation instead
and this basically monitors their location and constantly reports back when it updates. But in our case,
the request location is sufficient.
But how do we actually get hold of that location once the location manager has found it?
Well, notice how requests location doesn't return anything.
In fact, the only way to get a hold of it is through the locationManager(_:didUpdateLocations:) method.
And this is what the locationManager is going to call once it finds the location. So given now that
you know what the delegate method is that you need to implement and you know all about protocols and
delegates, here's a challenge for you.
See if you can implement the required protocols and simply be able to print got location when the
locationManager triggers the didUpdateLocationsDelegate
method. Also, try to use a Swift extension to split out the didUpdateLocation method from
the WeatherViewController.
Now, printing out got location can actually be a little bit harder than it sounds.
Make sure you have a read of the documentation to figure out how to do this successfully.
So pause the video and see if you can complete this challenge.
All right.
So firstly, we know that this method, once it gets hold of the location, is going to trigger this delegate
method.
And this delegate method if we click on it, shows us that it comes from the protocol
CLLocationManagerDelegate.
So we have to adopt this delegate protocol in our WeatherViewController if we want to be able to assign
ourselves as the delegate for the locationManager to be notified of that location update.
So we can either add our CLLocationManagerDelegate here, alternatively, as we saw in the last lesson.
We could simply create a brand-new extension down here which extends our WeatherViewController.
And here, we can add our CLLocationManagerDelegate, so that we split out this part of the functionality
of our WeatherViewController and we can mark it out with MARK comment, and we can call this
the
CLLocationManagerDelegate.
So you'll often see that people will split out their view controllers with sections that are named based
on the delegate protocols that they are adopting.
So this action is obviously related to the location manager, and the delegate method was called
didUpdateLocations, location manager did update locations.
So if we hit enter, that should enter that method for us.
Now, you have to remember that in order to actually get the notification for this, we have to set our
WeatherViewController,
so this current class, as the delegate for the locationManager. Without this property set, nothing is
going to happen even if you adopt the protocols and have the delegate methods.
So, now that everything is all set, we can simply print "Got location data" and then go ahead and hit run.
And at this point, your app will crash.
And if you scroll right to the top, you'll see that you have an error saying, "Terminating apps," so your app
crashed, "because of a reason the delegate must respond to locationManager:didUpdateLocations."
And you're wondering, "Hey, wait a minute. I did actually respond to locationManager:didUpdateLocation.
It's right here.
What's going on?
Well, the reason is because we have to set the current class as the delegate to be able to register with
the locationManager and to be able to respond when requestLocation actually triggers this method.
So what you'll find is that if you have the locationManager.delegate = self set after you
trigger this method, you're going to end up crashing your app.
Now, in addition, if you take a look at the quick docs for request location, it says right at the bottom:
"When using this method, the associated delegate must implement the didUpdateLocation and
didFailWithError methods.
Failure to do so is a programmer error."
So in addition to having this locationManager, didUpdateLocationsDelegate method implemented,
we also must make sure that we have our locationManager didFailWithErrorMethod implemented.
And in this method, all I'm gonna do is just print the error
if there were any.
And that's the solution to the challenge.
The trick of this challenge was to make sure that you set the WeatherViewController as the delegate
before requesting the location and also to make sure you've implemented the required didFailWithErrorDelegate
method.
So, now if we run our app,
then you should see "Got location" printed in the console because the locationManager has found the location
and they are triggering this method.
But where's the permission request?
Where's the pop up?
Because we've already agreed to share our location to this app,
we don't get that pop up ever again.
We only see it once. And once you've agreed to it, then you don't need to touch it anymore.
If you ever need to change it, then you can go into the settings of the simulator or your phone privacy
location services. And here under your app Clima, you can see "Never," "Ask Next Time," or what we've agreed
to at the moment "While using the app." So what if instead of printing "Got location data," we can actually
print out the actual location of where our simulator is located,
terms of the longitude and latitude.
How would we do that?
Well, notice how when the locationManager calls this method, it also passes in this "locations" input.
And this is an array of CLLocations. We can get hold of the last location that they added in there.
So we'll just call it location and we'll set it to equal locations.last.
So that's the last item in the array.
And generally, the locationManager will try to get the current GPS location and hone in on a relatively
accurate version of it,
so you might end up with several locations. By fetching the last location,
we should be able to get the most accurate one. But because this locations.last is an optional,
in order to use it, we should first optionally bind it to a new constant called location, so that we unwrap
it. And then within this block, we can create a latitude which will set to equal to location.coordinate.latitude,
and then we can create a longitude which is going to be the location.coordinates.longitude.
-
And now let's try and print out those values: the lat and lon.
So let's hit run and see what happens.
And there it is.
I can see my current location which is London and I've got a latitude of 51.5,
a longitude of -0.1.
Now, you might be wondering, how are you getting a location data for the simulator?
Well, if you're going to debug, there's a section called Location. And here you can set a location for the simulator.
I've set mine to Custom Location and added the coordinates for London.
You can also change the simulators location, say, to Apple's headquarters.
However, the simulator doesn't always pick up the location change right away.
And in order for that to go through, you also have to head over to Home. and go ahead and delete that
Clima app. In order to run it again, and it will now report the updated latitude and longitude.
And if you want to test this, you can also set a custom location with a custom latitude and longitude
as well.
But again, you'll have to go through the process of deleting the app and rerunning it again.
So, now that we've got a latitude and longitude, if we head over to the OpenWeather Map API Docs,
you can see that in order to get the current weather data, we can either go by city name or we can also go
by geographic coordinates which is what we've got at the moment.
And the way to make that API call is using the same URL as what we used previously.
But then at the end, we tag on two parameters: a lot and a lon.
And notice how the lon is spelled a little bit
weirdly. it's L-O-N, rather than L-O-N-G.
So in order for our API call to work, we have to be able to match their parameter names.
Let's first test it out in the browser.
Let's go ahead and go into our WeatherManager and get hold of our weatherURL with our app ID,
and our units already set, and then I'm going to paste it into the browser bar, and then I'm going
to add another parameter by adding the ampersand symbol, and the first one was called lats will set lat
equal to, let's say, 51, which is roughly around where I am.
And then let's add another one with the ampersand and this is going to be lon with L-O-N,
and this is gonna be equal to -0.1 which is going to be roughly around London.
So now if we hit Enter, you can see that we're getting our data back.
It's clear skies with a temperature of 19.4.
Perfect.
Now that it's working, let's try and figure out how we can form this URL string in our code.
So down here, we've already got a fetchWeather method that takes a cityName and creates a
urlString from it. And then performs the request with that urlString which goes into this method
and does the networking using URLSession to fetch some data back from OpenWeather Map. And then
we parse the data, and then we create a weather object to pass back to our delegate.
So this part is actually completely reusable.
It's exactly the same process.
So all that we need is another fetchWeather method.
So if we go into our WeatherViewController, and right where we get back our latitude and longitude,
so I'm going to delete those two print statements,
instead, I'm gonna call my weatherManager and I'm going to get it to fetchWeather, but instead of using
a cityName parameter, I want to be able to use the latitude parameter and put in the lat constants that I've
just got,
and then the longitude, which is going to have the long property. And I want to be able to call this method
in order to get some weather data. And when this goes through successfully and I actually manage to get
the data, then the data is going to come back inside my didUpdateWeatherDelegate method. And it's
here where it's going to update our temperatureLabel and conditionImageView without any extra code
on our part.
So this is a time for your challenge.
The challenge is to make this method work and get rid of all of the errors. Write the method
fetchWeather with latitude and longitude in the WeatherManager, so that when you run the app, it actually gets the
weather for your current location.
So pause the video and try that now.
All right.
So let's go ahead and copy this method and we're going to implement it in our WeatherManager.
So down here, I'm going to create another function called fetchWeather. And Swift is totally cool with
methods which have the same name as long as they have different parameter names.
So this fetchWeather method is going to have the latitude and longitude parameter names and it's going
to take two pieces of data.
Now, how can we figure out what data type we are going to send over?
Well, if we head back to our WeatherViewController and we hold down option and click on latitude or
longitude, then you can see the data type of the latitude and longitude.
It's something called Core Location LocationDegrees.
So CLLocationDegrees.
So let's go back to our WeatherManager and assign that as the data type that we're expecting,
CLLocationDegrees for the latitude and CLLlocationDegrees for the longitude.
And once we get hold of the latitude and longitude, what we're going to do is we're going to create a
URLString, and it's going to be equal to an interpolated string that's created the first part being
the weatherURL, and then at the end, we're going to tag on the property lat which is going to
equal latitude that we got passed in.
And then the second property that we need to add is the lon, and remember to check that you've spelled
it exactly the same as what I've got here,
L-O-N and L-A-T.
This is a really common place where students fall down. And then we're going to set it equal to, making
sure that there's no spaces anywhere the longitude that got passed over from our location manager.
Now that we're done with our urlString, all we have to do is trigger performRequest with
our urlString. And it will go through the same process as it did before with the cityName to network
and pass the data, and then trigger our delegate method didUpdateWeather which will update our temperatureLabel
and our conditionImageView.
So let's hit run and see this in action
So you saw it immediately update with the location-based temperature and condition.
And now if I go ahead and type a city, say, Paris, you can see that in Paris, it's thunderstorms. That also
works. But how do we get back to our location-based weather? And how can we update our cityLabel to be
able to tell us which city we're currently in when we're getting our location data? And I want to pose
this as a challenge to you.
Can you write the last part of the app on your own? Link of the button in the top left, so that when it
gets pressed, we get the weather for the current location displayed. Also, the label should update to show
the name of the current location. On the other hand, when we type in a cityName, we get the weather for
that location and the label will display the name we get back from OpenWeather Map. Linking up the button
will be the tricky part. So check the documentation in Stack Overflow
to figure this out. I'll give you a few seconds to pause video before I show you the solution.
All right.
Here's the solution.
Let's tackle updating the cityLabels first.
Now, if we take a look at the data that we get back from OpenWeather Map, you can see that right at the
bottom, we get the name of the location based on the latitude and longitude.
So if I go ahead and update my latitude and longitude to my current location, then you can see that it's
telling me that I'm currently inside the city of London.
So we've already managed to get hold of that name property here.
All we need to do is inside our WeatherViewController where we're updating our labels, we should go
ahead and set the self.cityLabel.text to equal the weather.cityName property. So now
that should populate our citylabel.
Let's give it a run, see if that works.
And as you can see that the label is now updating using the location name from the JSON that we got
from OpenWeather Map.
At the moment, I still got my simulator set to Cupertino.
Let me change the simulator back to London using the custom coordinates.
And now if I simply just quit the simulator and then rerun the app, you can see that it's now updated
to use that current location.
So switching different location types in the simulator can be quite painful. But hopefully, if you're
running this on a physical device, you'll actually be getting your exact current location. So, now all
that's left is to be able to switch back to location mode when we have gone to the city mode.
So right now I've got my weather for Paris and I want to be able to click on this button to go back
to my current location's weather.
So in order to do that, the first thing we need to do is to create an IBAction.
Here let's create an IBAction that links this button down into our WeatherViewontroller
and I'm going to call this action locationPressed, and then change the data type into UIButton.
And now I've got my IBAction locationPressed where I can change my app to, again,
use the locationManager's location to get the weather. But how do I trigger this
locationManager, didUpdateLocations method again?
Well, one way of doing it would be to call this requestLocation method again.
But if we've already requested the location and we haven't changed our GPS location, then if there's
no change, then there's gonna be no update.
So this method is not going to get called.
And you can confirm this by simply adding a print statement inside the locationManager.
So the way to solve this is we want to be able to call locationManager.requestLocation and trigger
a reupdate and call this method again so that we fetch the weather.
But in order for this to work, once we've gotten hold of the weather, either at the time when we've loaded
up our app or at the time where they press the location button, we want to be able to stop the
locationManager.
So we're gonna say locationManager.stopUpdatingLocation as soon as it's gotten hold of a location.
So now the sequence of events is, first, we set our locationManagersDelegate as ourself, then we call
requestLocation, locationManager is gonna be hard at work fetching the current location.
And once it does, it calls this method passing in the locations that it's found, and we look inside that
array to find a location.
And as soon as we found one, then we tell the locationManager to stop and we use the location to get
the current weather.
So at a later point, if we press on the locationPressed button, then it calls this method again.
And now our locationManager has been activated once more, so we can call this delegate method again.
Let's give that a go and see if it works.
The first thing that we see is the current location's weather. And now I'm going to search for another
location's weather, see what it's like in Beijing. And now if I want to switch back to location mode,
I press on this button and I trigger the request location once more where the locationManager calls
didUpdateLocation and I fetch the weather again.
So that's it.
We've managed to create our weather app that uses the current location to get weather, as well as using
the city name that the user types in through the text field. And in the process, we've learned about text
field, protocols and delegates, extensions, networking with URL session, as well as parsing JSON data.
So it's been a pretty jam-packed module if you ask me. And it might be that you might have to review
certain parts of this module over the coming days to be able to really digest it and make it your own.
But once you've done that, head over to the next lesson and there'll be a challenge, as usual, for you.
And I'll see you on the next module.